CS 533INTRO TO DATA SCIENCE
Michael Ekstrand
BIASES AND ASSUMPTIONS
Learning Outcomes
Reason about potential biases in classification inputs and outputs
Identify cases where building a classifier is not appropriate
Assumptions of Most Predictions
Outcome variable is unbiased
Features unbiased
Outcome variable matches target
Predicting this outcome with these features is reasonable
Think about what the predictor implies
A Few Sources of Bias (Week 2)
Selection bias
Some people more likely to be contacted

Response bias
Some people are more likely to respond

Measurement bias
Measurement skews one way or another



Error and Bias
Observations are often erroneous.

Bias is when they are systematically erroneous.
Tend high or low
May be different for different groups
Biased Features
If features are unbiased ⇒ errors roll into model uncertainty

If they have known bias ⇒ may be able to correct
Remove bias term
Normalize by groups?

Unknown bias ⇒ how severe? (may need to abandon!)
Assumptions
Example: SAT scores — differ by SES (socio-economic status)

What’s more likely?
Poor students are less academically capable
Poor students have less access to academic preparation
The SAT measures both academic capability and familiarity with middle- to upper-class social conventions
Outcome/Target Mismatch
Aren’t predicting what we think we are

Example: crime
Data: crime reports or arrests
Goal: predict crime level
Reality: predict crime report level or police activity
Photo by Woody Kelly on Unsplash
Claims and Evidence
Our claims must be supported by our evidence

Can’t claim a crime detector when our data is crime reports

This is why the goal ⇔ question ⇔ analysis chain is critical!
Task Reasonableness
What does trying to predict Y with X inherently assume?
Predict college GPA with SAT scores
Performance on a standardized test is legitimate basis for predicting future academic grades
Classifying ‘criminal’ based on photos
Facial features are a legitimate predictor of criminality
This is called ‘physiognomy’, and has been rejected for a century
Related: ‘phrenology’, connecting personality to skull shape
Crime/Face Correlation
What is crime?

Why would it be a physically observable characteristic?

Be careful what you assume
Theory drives research questions
Theory drives predictions
Label Dependencies
What to Do?
Assume data is biased (especially social data)
Understand how the data is collected and what labels actually are
Study what is known about those biases
Look for systematic variations in the data
Clarify and document your assumptions
Always be critical — does problem or outcome make sense?
Read broadly and critically
Wrapping Up
All analyses are based on assumptions — be clear about what yours are.

Data are biased. Study to see how.

There’s no magic bullet.
Photo by Parizad Shojaei on Unsplash
