CS 533INTRO TO DATA SCIENCE
Michael Ekstrand
WAYS OF KNOWING
Learning Outcomes
Understand different sources of knowledge
Identify sources of knowledge appropriate to a question
Photo by Jaredd Craig on Unsplash
Some Types of Knowledge
Quantitative
Qualitative
Analytical / Proof
Theory
Critical

No form is the “best”.  And, we often need multiple together!
These are both empirical
Quantitative Methods
Numeric measurements and estimates.
How many?
What fraction?
Predicting numeric outcomes
Quantitative Submethods
Observational studies – what can we see?

Experimental studies – what happens when we act?

Simulation studies – what happens in synthetic environments?
Numbers. What Are They Good For?
We can:
How often does X happen?
When X happens, is Y likely to happen?

We can’t:
Why does X happen?
What do the situations where X happens look like?
What new X should we look for?
Qualitative Methods
Interpretation and analysis.
Why did someone do X?
What do people want?

Engages directly with source material.

Note: surveys are not qualitative.

Example Problem
Goal: identify employee concerns and opportunities to improve
Method: semi-structured interviews
Resulting Data: interviews with employees

Don’t have time to interview them all.

Goal is not statistical representation.

Example Method: Grounded Theory
Break interviews into distinct statements / observations
Group observations together into themes
If it is like an existing theme: add it
If it is not like an existing theme: start a new one
Merge themes if/as necessary

Stop at saturation – more data does not produce more concepts

Outcome: themes with illustrative quotations
Qualitative Empiricism
Qualitative methods are empirical
Conclusions are grounded in and supported by data
The data is just analyzed differently!

Qualitative can demonstrate:
Existence of phenomena
Mechanisms for phenomena

Data is “thick”, but low in quantity
Mixing Methods
Qual and quant can work together

Qual first:
Qualitative study with small group to identify concerns
Quantitative survey to measure prevalence

Quant first:
Quantitative analysis to identify stores with low employee retention
Qualitative interviews to see what is happening at those stores
A Number
30
Numbers Have No Meaning
What does 30 mean?

We need context to interpret the meaning
Typical size of this class
High for graduate classes, average for department
Class size affects student-teacher engagement
Context
We need context to

Interpret quantities
Identify quantities of interest

Analytical Methods
Mathematical proofs and derivations.

Usually quantitative
Always true (given assumptions)
May be probabilistic

Example: law of large numbers
On average, the average of a random sample is approximately the true average
Critical Methods
Analyze and explicate power structures.

Who has power in a situation?
What are the effects of that power?
How does perspective & power affect questions and conclusions?

Example: employer-employee power dynamic affects response to survey.
One Application
Who is making decisions?
What to ask
Who to ask
What to do with the results

Asking employees is not sharing power
Theory
Merriam-Webster:
A plausible or scientifically acceptable general principle or body of principles offered to explain phenomena.

Theory drives analysis – what questions do we ask?

Theory comes from all these sources

Data refines, confirms, and rejects theory
Social Construction
Knowledge is said to be socially constructed.

Knowledge comes through processes
These processes are social
And therefore have biases, etc.

Does not mean knowledge is fake, made up, or unreliable.
Wrapping Up
Quantitative measurements and analysis are not the only, or the best, way to produce knowledge.

Multiple sources together give us knowledge and insight.
