CS 533INTRO TO DATA SCIENCE
Michael Ekstrand
MULTIPLE LINEAR REGRESSION
Learning Outcomes
Build models with 2 or more predictors
Compare models using the Adjusted R2 and AIC

Photo by Jen Theodore on Unsplash
Base Model
Assumption Checks
Adding Species
Do different species have different flipper lengths?

Formula API automatically dummy-codes species.

Intercept: baseline Adelie mass
Species: increase/decrease in baseline mass for each species
Adding Species
Adjusted R2 for multivariate regression
Adjusts for multiple variables

AIC compares models for same predictor – lower is better fit
Combines estimation power with model complexity
Plot & Residuals
Interaction Effects
Interaction effects apply to products of variables

Categorical + Numeric: adjust slope by category
Plot & Residuals
Specifying Main and Interaction Effects
Main effect – effect of the variable(s) on their own
Specified with V1 + V2 + … + Vn
Interaction effect – interaction (product) of variables
Specified with V1:V2
Full effects – main and interaction
Specified with V1 * V2
Expands to V1 + V2 + V1:V2
Sexual Dimorphism
Flipper/species interaction not significant
After accounting for species and sex differences, data does not support different flipper/mass slopes for different species.
Simplified
Slightly better AIC
Same Adj. R2
Species & Sex have subtle interpretation
Most of the chinstrap difference is that male chinstraps are smaller
Gentoos and Adelies likely have the same mass dimorphism
Assumption Checks
Beware Correlated Predictors
Correlated predictors cause poor model fits
Problem is called multicollinearity
X1
X2
Y
X1 causes X2?
X2 causes X1?
X? causes X1 and X2?

Which coefficient gets the common effect?

Can even invert signs!
Pair Plot – useful for detecting correlations
Also use a correlation matrix.
Occam’s Razor
Given two explanations, prefer the one with fewer assumptions

Application to modeling:
Prefer simple models
Features and complexity need to earn their keep

AIC is one embodiment of this.

Wrapping Up
Linear models can extend to multiple variables.

We can look at separate (main) and interaction effects.

Prefer simple models.
Photo by Luís Eusébio on Unsplash
