CS 533INTRO TO DATA SCIENCE
Michael Ekstrand
ASKING QUESTIONS
Learning Outcomes
Understand components of a good question
Understand how questions relate to goals and analyses
Think about data for a question

Key term: operationalization

What is Data Science?
The use of data to provide quantitative insights on questions of scientific, business, or social interest.
Example: Department Interest
Context: changed assignment structures in CS121
Goal: Assess whether new change improved CS121

What does ‘improve’ mean?
What data could inform the assessment?
What could we do with that data to measure improvement?
Operationalization
We call this operationalization

Start with a goal
Refine through intermediate questions
Define a specific measurement to take
What, precisely, is collected
How, precisely, it is computed
operationalize, v.:
The process of doing this.

operationalization, n.:
The result of this process.
Example: Department Interest
Goal: Assess whether new change improved CS121

Question: Are students better prepared to excel at work?
Question: Are students better prepared for the next class?
Goals, Questions, and Analysis
Questions do not have 1 level
May be multiple levels
Answering the question should advance the goal.
Or higher-level question

Carrying out the analysis should answer the question.
Operationalized Questions
They are specific
They are answerable
They can be answered with available data
Questions that fail this are not bad!

Example: Department Interest
Goal: Assess whether new change improved CS121

Question: Are students better prepared for next class?
Question: Are students more likely to pass CS 221?

Data: student grades for CS121 & 221

Caveats: many
Clarifying Questions
Your boss, client, etc. sets goals, may have questions

But they need to be refined before meeting data!

Refine this through clarifying questions!
Wrapping Up
Multiple layers to translate between data and high-level goals or objectives.

Questions bridge this gap.

Multiple levels of questions may be needed.
