CS 533INTRO TO DATA SCIENCE
Michael Ekstrand
PRESENTING DATA
Learning Outcomes (Week)
Create plots for data
Identify the appropriate type of plot for data in question
Read and interpret a plot
Refine a plot to more clearly show data
Write a well-organized notebook to present data analysis
Photo by Austin Distel on Unsplash
Purposes of Data Presentation
Guide reader attention to important results
Focus
Make it easy to ask the key questions
Substantiate results and conclusions
Do so with integrity
Audiences
You’ll need to present data to several audiences:

Yourself
Your collaborators, supervisors, etc.
Expert readers (know subject, not your work)
Decision-makers
The general public
Guiding Questions
What did you seek to find out?
What did you learn?
Why should the reader trust your conclusions?

Presentation with integrity shows the reader what you learned.
Dishonest presentation manipulates them.
Created by W.E.B. Du Bois for the 1900 Paris  Exposition.
From https://www.loc.gov/resource/ppmsca.33892/
Created by W.E.B. Du Bois for the 1900 Paris  Exposition.
From https://www.loc.gov/item/2013650445/
Wrapping Up
Data must be coded and encoded in order for us to process and analyze it.

The process of coding affects the data!

Representation must be documented for us to properly understand.
Photo by Ben White on Unsplash
STATISTICAL GRAPHICS
Learning Outcomes
Understand the value of graphics for presenting data
Identify the parts of a statistical image
Understand some pitfalls in graphics
Photo by KOBU Agency on Unsplash
TYPES OF CHARTS
Learning Outcomes
Identify the appropriate type of chart for data and a question
Understand key rules to avoid common errors
Photo by KOBU Agency on Unsplash
FINISHING TOUCHES
Learning Outcomes
Save a chart to an image file
Label charts for clear presentation
Refine chart axis marks
Photo by KOBU Agency on Unsplash
ORGANIZING NOTEBOOKS
Learning Outcomes
Use Markdown document structure to organize a notebook
Use Jupyter and Markdown features to format text in a notebook
Create a notebook that clearly tells the story of a data analysis
Photo by KOBU Agency on Unsplash
DESIGNING TABLES
Learning Outcomes
Identify good or cluttering features of a tabular data presentation
Create a table to summarize data findings

Photo by KOBU Agency on Unsplash
PRESENTATION WRAP-UP
Learning Outcomes
Review and summarize lessons of the week
Understand different output formats
Know where to study more about statistical graphics

Photo by KOBU Agency on Unsplash
Wrapping Up
Data must be coded and encoded in order for us to process and analyze it.

The process of coding affects the data!

Representation must be documented for us to properly understand.
Photo by Alexander Schimmeck on Unsplash
